Source: The Daily UW
Title: U-District High-Rises Are Scamming Students (Opinion)
Date: Jan 2024
URL: https://www.dailyuw.com/opinion/u-district-high-rises-are-scamming-students/article_4b95323c-be66-11ee-9e38-f3b7dfaaaca5.html

Lyn Tampi
Ah, sophomore year of college — a time to juggle a quarter-life crisis, apply to majors, and battle college situationships. It just so happens that it is also the summer when a college student decides to move out of their dorm, and they are presented with their newest struggle: moving into their first apartment.
Like many college experiences, this particular moving process is a first for most students.
Students are filled with questions like: How do I even find an apartment? How do I pay bills? What do I even do to begin this apartment-moving thing? The process, while exciting for many, can feel daunting.
At first glance, there is an abundance of student housing available in the U-District. Yet, despite the amount of units available and the amount of new high-rise buildings being constructed, the soaring costs of rent in the U-District has made most housing options inaccessible to students.
So here you are: you’ve finally found an apartment building that charges under $2500 for rent after weeks of searching. You move into a new building, telling yourself that although you’ll be on that ice soup diet for a while, at least you live in an apartment close to UW with a gym and a sweet view. Soon, however, you find yourself amongst the many students moving into newer buildings who have found that their $2,000 plus rent is paying for incompetent management, malfunctioning amenities, and unsecured premises.
Many such complaints have come from students living in the newly constructed Standard apartment buildings, completed Sept. 2023.
Standard residents have voiced concerns that their rent prices are too high for the amount of problems they experience with the buildings.
Caitlin Igel, a third-year student, moved into the north Standard building the first day it became available. Among the problems she described were spotty WiFi, leaking sprinklers, no blinds or curtains on her unit’s windows, unsecured premises, and disorganized management.
She lives in a studio and pays over $2,000 for rent, but said that her rent is expected to soon increase to $2,300 minus parking. Igel described her move-in process as “absolutely awful.”
”They had everyone moving on the same day in a brand-new apartment,” Igel said. “We had to wait 20 minutes every time we wanted an elevator.”

It wasn’t just an overly crowded move-in day that slowed down the elevators.
I visited the Standard with Igel to talk with her about her move-in experience and to see the building in person. As we took the elevator up to the Standard’s rooftop lounge, Igel told me that the elevators remained broken even after move-in day.
“They would just stop at whatever floor they wanted to,” Igel said. “It would stop and then open the doors, and no one would be there, and it would be like, ‘Oops, sorry.’”
When I asked her how long it had taken for the elevators to work properly, Igel told me that they had only been fixed about three weeks before our interview.
On the rooftop lounge, Igel showed me the spa room which is currently under construction, even though the building was finished in September. The Standard advertises the hot tub as one of its amenities, yet, as I looked into the unfinished spa room, I saw an empty, roped-off hot tub. A sign hung from the tub’s barrier that read “SPA CLOSED,” as if to stick its tongue out at you.
Another common complaint among Standard residents is the lack of a proper mail and package room. Both Igel and Natalie George, a fourth-year student, said that the lack of organization regarding resident mail results in frequently delayed and stolen packages.
“You get a code on your phone, and you walk into the package room,” George said. “It’s every single package, every single person has ordered at both the north and south towers, like hundreds. I’ve had so many packages stolen.”
UPackage rooms were not the only things that weren’t properly secured. In fact, for months the doors leading from the garage into the building did not have functioning card readers. Igel said that the elevators were not secured with card readers either until residents complained about it.
“They didn’t install the garage door until probably a month ago either,” said Igel. “You could just walk into the garage and get up to every single floor.”
The Standard and other U-District high-rises charge obscene rent prices because they offer convenient locations and attractive amenities. A $2,300 studio apartment rent might be justified if the buildings were actually in fully functional condition, but with such an abundance of problems that cause significant disturbances to residents, students are only being taken advantage of.

”Some things are great,” Igel said. “But some things just suck.”
