Source: The Daily UW
Title: High Housing Costs Challenge UW Students Staying in Seattle for the Summer
Date: Apr 16, 2025
URL: https://www.dailyuw.com/article/high-housing-costs-challenge-uw-students-staying-in-seattle-for-the-summer-20250416

Many UW students are currently making the decision to remain in Seattle over the summer for reasons such as successfully landing a local internship, continuing academics over summer quarter, or simply enjoying the city. Many students, however, share the concern regarding the high price and demand for housing, creating a significant barrier to staying in Seattle.
UW Housing & Food Services (HFS) offers on-campus summer housing, aimed at students currently living on campus during the school year. However, many prospective residents are deterred by the high price. UW’s summer resident rate ranges between $1,608 and $1,654 per month for single rooms with shared bathrooms in Stevens Court.
Some students look to off-campus apartments for a cheaper alternative, but apartments can be just as expensive as on-campus housing. The average monthly rent for a U-District studio apartment is $1,334, with that number increasing to $1,765 for a one-bedroom. For students like Bee Alexander McNally and Gus Heidgerken, who plan to stay in Seattle during the summer, high prices cause concern.
Heidgerken plans to continue living in his room in Trailside Student Living, costing around $1,400 per month. Although his parents support his rent, he covers other living costs on his own, something that has created issues.
“My food budget is considerably lower,” Heidgerken said. “That's all me supporting myself, and so that sort of thing has definitely taken a hit.”
McNally plans to sublet a room in The Standard for $1,400 per month. His agreement is an informal verbal agreement with a friend, but he trusts it due to their friendship.
“I'm sure that if anything was wrong with the apartment, he would help me out with it,” McNally said. “I'm not stressed about the fact that I don't have a written contract.”
Additionally, McNally expressed concern about their budget for future apartments, both on and off-campus.
“UW’s housing is really expensive … [on campus apartments] are equivalent to living in any other apartment,” McNally said. “If you want something that's $1,000 [per month] or even less, you have to hunt around.”
Apartments are expensive, but students in Greek life have access to more affordable housing. Kyra Steinkirchner has lived in fraternities for the past two summers, paying a combined $1,400 for shared rooms across both summers.

Students participating in summer live-in programs apply at the beginning of spring quarter, applying directly to fraternities open for summer live-in by filling out a short application. These applications are informal and primarily focused on the personality of the applicant.
“It's just a few questions: What's your name? What house are you in? What are some things you like to do? What are some ideas you have that we can all do as a house over summer?” Steinkirchner said.
After acceptances are released, applicants decide which house to live in, and who to room with. Steinkirchner praised the communal structure of fraternity summer live-in and the connections she made because of it.
“I got to meet a lot of different girls from other houses and one girl from my house,” Steinkirchner said. “It was cool to build connections with other sororities.”
In the minds of many students, spending summer in Seattle is still worth it despite the challenges. Working students can take advantage of Seattle’s higher minimum wage and can enjoy Seattle without the stress of coursework.
“The time I've spent here has all been focused around school, so I'm excited to actually, really live here, not just go to school here,” Heidgerken said.
