Source: The Daily UW
Title: Bang Over Buck: The High Prices Behind the U-District's Newest High-Rises
Date: Mar 9, 2026
URL: https://www.dailyuw.com/article/bang-over-buck-the-high-prices-behind-the-u-district-s-newest-high-rises-20260309

It’s nearing the end of winter quarter, which means that the vague, dread-inducing specter of finding a place to live next year is finally becoming a reality. As of writing this, I must bashfully admit that I have still not signed a lease for next year, meaning that scrutinizing apartment prices and contemplating the merits of fixed utility costs remain at the forefront of my mind.
That being said, the other day, I swept my gaze across the cloud-wreathed U-District skyline and couldn’t help but notice the glaring twin monoliths towering above the Ave. The Standard, a paragon of student housing by virtue of sheer immensity, was an option I had written off by default. A grandiose, hyper-modern building with enough windows to single-handedly keep the Seattle glass industry afloat? Well, that was sure to be out of my price range — and a brief Google search swiftly confirmed the truth of that fact.
However, that invites another question — why are all these new apartments so grossly overpriced, while the more cost-conscious of us are forced to resort to buildings dating back decades?
Let’s start with the Standard as an example, which finished construction in 2023. To keep things consistent, we’ll look at a one-person studio apartment; in this case, a 407-square-foot apartment is offered for $2,700 a month. As a result, the monthly price per square foot works out to be $6.63.
This number means nothing alone, so for context, we can examine one of my personal prospective candidates for an apartment lease: Campus View. This debatably charming slice of student housing was built in the U-District in 1986, and despite rising high enough to merit its name, is still dwarfed by the Standard a few blocks down. More importantly, the price per square foot pales in comparison at $3.33 — nearly half that of its counterpart.
This trend holds rather well across most apartments I’ve investigated. Just look at Westwood Apartments, hailing from 1985, coming in at a remarkably low $2.93 per square foot. Meanwhile, the fresh-faced Accolade, arriving on the scene in 2022, is $6.19 per square foot when looking at its most generous floor plan.
In effect, leasing a brand-new apartment is probably costing you at least twice as much as a building from four decades ago. Categorically, this makes little sense. Maybe my innate stinginess is acting up, but I’ve seen both the cutting edge and Old Faithful of student housing, and I wouldn’t be caught dead paying double the price for the former over the latter.
Discovering the reasoning for this discrepancy is an elusive task. The Sightline Institute, a nonpartisan think tank focused on the Pacific Northwest,
lays out the situation rather well.
Essentially, the cost of rent is a direct function of the expenses paid for the building and the amount of revenue investors want to receive. Among innumerable contributing factors to the cost of rent, a significant portion comes down to construction costs.
Unfortunately for our attempts to understand the cost of rent, increasing construction costs over time do not entirely explain this gulf in rent prices. Taking a look at the Engineering News Record’s
Construction Cost Index
over time, the average construction cost in the U.S. grew by 211% from 1985 to 2022. While this does outpace the inflation rate in that time of 172%, this gap is nowhere near enough to justify doubling the price. And though we can point to other factors, such as Seattle’s increased tax rate, according to the Sightline Institute, taxes only account for 18.8% of the total price.
That’s a lot of math to effectively say that the shoe lies on the other foot: the revenue side of things. And naturally, the people in charge of a building’s revenue are those who stand to make a profit: your friendly neighborhood landlords, investors, and real estate tycoons. These prices are as high as they are because they know they can get away with it.

As stingy as I am, I’m also not representative of the general population. There are indeed more than enough eager tenants willing to fork over premium prices to fill up the Standard and its cohort of modern alternatives.
What, then, is to be done for the rest of us? Well, here’s a little secret: You can get housing quality as good as you need at an affordable rate, if you know exactly what to give up.
I asked fourth-year Frank Wu, one of the few to have cracked the student housing code, what his process was in selecting his apartment of choice.
“It’s far from campus, I’d say, but it’s close enough,” Wu said. “And the nicest part of that is that it’s got a pretty large living room.”
Wu, to be clear, is splitting a rent of approximately $2,000 a month between him and his other roommate, for what seems to be a rather solid amount of square footage. He estimated his building to originate from the early 2000s — which testifies to the building’s good condition, given that public records show that it was built in 1985.
Part of Wu’s success comes from swallowing the slightly longer commute, about 20 minutes by his reckoning, that comes with housing in the further-flung outskirts of the U-District. But Wu also clearly had his priorities straight in regards to perhaps the most important aspect: the amenities.
“It doesn’t have a bunch of fluff on it,” Wu said. “The nice apartments have a gym and all that. I feel like I don’t need that.”
Therein lies the problem. Almost every big-name, expensive modern apartment complex coasts off the litany of amenities it has on offer. But when you realize that these services are more often than not either irrelevant or easily substituted for exterior options, a lot of the appeal of shiny new workout equipment or complementary coffee machines might just become not worth it.
I’m not saying you can’t splurge on a nice new apartment. But by design of those who have the most to gain, you’re not quite getting the best bang for your buck. That retro eighties building with the wooden frame and beat-up front door down the street could be so much more worth it. You’ll just have to know where to look.
