Source: The Daily UW
Title: The Ugly Side of UW Housing
Date: Apr 17, 2026
URL: https://www.dailyuw.com/article/the-ugly-side-of-uw-housing-20260417

Picture stained and sticky carpets, broken elevators, sweltering hot rooms, and dangers lurking outside. Going off that list, one might think I’m describing a haunted house or maybe a really unkept hotel. Unfortunately, in reality, this list describes (albeit dramatically) a few key qualities that make up UW’s dorms.
At universities across the country, freshman housing and the associated hardships are a critical part of the college experience. Many schools require students to dorm their first year, and while UW does not, any first-years who choose the dorm life get the typical scary dorm experiences as well.
Compared to other schools, UW has relatively good housing options. Students have the option to pick from 12 dorms on North or West Campus, many of which are new, well-furnished, carpeted, and come with private bathrooms. However, no dorm comes without its flaws, and underneath their shiny exteriors, UW dormitories have many.
As summer approaches and spring is in full swing, the weather is heating up, and so are the dorms. At times like this, a small dorm room can somehow feel ten times worse than the weather outside.
During the coolness of winter quarter, I blissfully forgot about the horrors of move-in day, walking into my seventh-floor dorm for the first time and being hit by a thick wave of heat. While it was 65 degrees outside, my dorm was closer to a balmy 78 degrees, with high humidity. At the time, the excitement of moving into my first-ever college dorm distracted me from the sweltering heat — but trying to fall asleep that first night was nearly impossible.
As someone from Georgia, newly renovated buildings lacking air conditioning were unheard of, and I was shocked that the thermostat’s buttons didn’t work. Even in the cold, getting the heat to work was difficult. While I was sick with the flu during winter quarter, only one of my attempts to get the thermostat working was successful — and even then, in order to feel the heat, I had to curl up next to the heater, with my hands extended as if it were a fire.
I am not alone on this. First-year student and West Campus dorm resident Mia Dawson faced similar issues with the heat.
“When it was warm out, I had so many nights where I woke up, and I was like, ‘I'm dying,’” Dawson said. “I think Seattle does not have the infrastructure for an increasingly warmer climate, and I think that's going to be very, very apparent this summer.”
Although this topic could cover an entire extra article, there is also the factor of safety in the dorms.
Just since starting as a first-year this past September, I have read at least five UW safety alerts of dangerous activity in or around the dorms, and those are just the ones that were reported. Online and through friends, I have heard of even more instances.

Dawson had an experience with a seemingly hostile man trying to get into the front doors of her West Campus dorm building and prohibiting other residents from entering. Around the middle of winter quarter, while relaxing in the lounge and kitchen area of her dorm, Dawson and her friends noticed a man pacing outside the building.
“[The man] really started being a little bit more aggressive and was stopping somebody from actually coming into the building. He was like sidestepping them,” Dawson said.
One of the building's residents attempted to help another student into the building and yelled at the man, prompting him to leave.
“There were two incidents, and he went away the first time, and then he came back, and he was [then] shirtless … it was very obvious, I think, that he was not mentally well,” Dawson said. “But still, it was very concerning for our safety, especially.”
Living in a big city comes with the expectation of experiencing the occasional unsafe situation. But students in dorms should not have to worry about their safety, especially when there are no front desks and no safety precautions other than using the Husky Card to get in.
Considering the amount that UW students pay for housing, these should not be issues we have to face. For a three-bunk triple room in one of UW’s newer halls, like Oliver or Lander, the price tag is $3,529 per quarter. That comes out to $10,587 a year, not counting the money students who dorm have to pay for a dining plan.
On the topic of pricing, there is a perceivable gap in quality between some West Campus dorms and their North counterparts. In multiple West Campus dorms, there are only two kitchens in the entire building, whereas on North Campus, every new hall has at least one kitchen on each floor. North dorms are also arguably graced with nicer couches, more decor, and carpets with fewer stains. Two North Campus dorms are not as pristine and modern as the others: Hansee Hall and McMahon Hall, built in the 1920s and 1960s, respectively.
Marina Caneppele Chaibub lives in McMahon, and although she has enjoyed her time there for the most part, she has noticed discrepancies between McMahon and the other North dorms.
“There is no kitchen at all in McMahon. There's a communal microwave, and it's pretty nasty, and a communal vacuum, and, like, an ironing board, missing the iron,” Caneppele Chaibub said. “It's very run-down. You look at it, and it's like, ‘Yeah, this is from like the ‘60s.’”
All dorms, however, seem to have one thing in common: the elevators consistently break down.

“North Tower’s [elevator] breaks, like, once a month on the clock,” Chaibub said.
On the other side of campus from McMahon, the same problem occurs.
“There's been multiple times we've gone our way, and [an elevator] has a nice sticker across the front of it and says this one is not working,” Dawson said.
For the amount of money UW students are paying for these dorms, elevators being consistently out of order, the thermostats not working, and students feeling unsafe are not issues we should have to face. UW Housing and Food Services needs to address these problems and make the dorms more comfortable and safe environments for students.
