Source: The Daily UW
Title: Students Weigh Cost With Convenience in Search for Off-Campus Housing
Date: Feb 13, 2026
URL: https://www.dailyuw.com/article/students-weigh-cost-with-convenience-in-search-for-off-campus-housing-20260213

Approximately two-thirds of students who live on campus are first-years or transfer students, while most returning students live off campus and navigate the U-District housing market, weighing the cost of rent with the convenience of living close to campus.
The Standard, which boasts of its amenities and proximity to campus, offers a two-bedroom apartment with a private bathroom at a starting monthly cost from $1,215 to $1,815, not including utilities or other fees. Alternatively, living in an on-campus Mercer Court two-bedroom apartment with a private bathroom costs $16,626 for the 2025-26 academic year, or roughly $1,847 per month.
According to assistant director of occupancy management Janie Sacco, UW does not guarantee housing for students because of facility capacity limitations. Sacco explained that, throughout her tenure at UW, every student who has applied in the priority housing period has received housing. Even the students who apply later are typically able to be accommodated, Sacco noted.
“While we don’t guarantee [housing], we do our best to make sure that students are able to live on campus and we’re able to provide housing security for almost all applicants, which is great,” Sacco said.
First-year student Aya Elkady said that if on-campus housing options were more affordable and not primarily used by first-year students, she might have considered living on campus again because of the convenience.
Sacco highlighted UW’s “one-bill model,” in which students can pay for all housing fees, such as utilities, as a convenient way for students to navigate housing payments instead of multiple leases. She also noted students can apply their financial aid to pay for on-campus housing.
Elkady lives in Oliver Hall, where the most common unit is a double room with a private bathroom, which costs $12,933 for the academic year or approximately $1,437 each month. Students living in residence halls are also required to have a dining plan — the cheapest of which starts at $1,253 per quarter.
Second-year student Rory Anderson lived in a triple dormitory on West Campus their first year at UW and found the dining plan restrictive — especially compared to their current off-campus house located over a mile from campus.
“I also didn’t like being forced to pay for a dining plan, which is something I also really liked about living in a house is that I have the opportunity to eat whatever I want and can make my own budget for food, and not being forced to spend money at somewhere where the prices are really high,” Anderson said.
In addition to the dining options, Anderson said living in a house is preferable, citing more personal space, access to outdoor space, including a parking spot, and the overall homier feeling of a house.

For Anderson, the cost of rent and proximity to a bus route were the biggest considerations when deciding where to live off campus.
“The rent I have was among the cheapest of the houses we were looking at, and then the apartments that I was looking into in winter quarter last year were all a lot more,” Anderson said. “So I think I'm definitely saving money.”
Elkady currently lives in a triple on North Campus but is looking for an apartment for next year. She said price is the most important factor in her decision of where to live next year, but she also values proximity to campus.
“When you do it right, an off-campus apartment can be cheaper than dorming, not necessarily just in price, but what you're getting,” Elkady said. “So, you're paying the same thing, but you're getting, like, your own room and your own bathroom, and like you, you have access to a kitchen and everything.”
Sacco said, although it depends on the type of housing, on-campus options are typically comparable in price to equivalent off-campus options.
“Something we do is we take a look at our off-campus markets just to see [and] make sure that we’re within what is comparable,” Sacco said.
Sacco also mentioned that the construction of Haggett Hall, scheduled to open in the fall of 2027, will add almost 800 spots to housing options on North Campus.
